[CIAPP] Public documentation for CI Pipeline monitors (#13130)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/monitors/create/types/ci_pipelines.md

{{< img src="monitors/monitor_types/ci_pipelines/define-the-search-query.png" alt="Define the search query" style="width:80%;" >}}

#### Using formulas and functions

You can create CI Pipeline monitors using formulas and functions. This can be used for example to create monitors on the **rate** of an event happening, such as the rate of a pipeline failing (error rate).

The following example is of a pipeline error rate monitor using a formula that calculates the ratio of "number of failed pipeline events" (`ci.status=error`) over "number of total pipeline events" (no filter), grouped by `ci.pipeline.name` (to be alerted once per pipeline).

{{< img src="monitors/monitor_types/ci_pipelines/define-the-search-query-fnf.png" alt="Define the search query" style="width:80%;" >}}

<div class="alert alert-info"><strong>Note</strong>: Only up to 2 queries can be used to build the evaluation formula per monitor.</div>

### Set alert conditions

* Trigger when the metric is `above`, `above or equal to`, `below`, or `below or equal to`

> * the threshold during the last `5 minutes`, `15 minutes`, `1 hour`, etc. or `custom` to set a value between `1 minute` and `2 days`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The threshold during the last `5 minutes`, `15 minutes`, `1 hour`, or `custom` to set a value between `1 minute` and `2 days`
```

* Alert threshold `<NUMBER>`
* Warning threshold `<NUMBER>`

#### Advanced alert conditions

> For detailed instructions on the advanced alert options (evaluation delay, etc.), see the [Monitor configuration][3] page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For detailed instructions on the advanced alert options (such as evaluation delay), see the [Monitor configuration][3] page.
```

### Notifications

For detailed instructions on the **Say what's happening** and **Notify your team** sections, see the [Notifications][4] page.

#### Notifications behavior when there is no data

> A monitor that uses an event count, or a formula for its evaluation query will resolve after the specified evaluation period with no data, triggering a notification. For example, a monitor using a formula to alert on pipeline error rate with an evaluation window of 5 minutes will automatically resolve after 5 minutes without any data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A monitor that uses an event count, or a formula for its evaluation query will resolve after the specified evaluation period with no data, triggering a notification. For example, a monitor using a formula to alert on pipeline error rate with an evaluation window of five minutes will automatically resolve after five minutes without any data.
```

> As CI pipeline data is usually sparse and can have relatively long periods with no data, this might result in monitor recovery notifications that might not be desired.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As CI pipeline data is usually sparse and can have relatively long periods with no data, this can result in monitor recovery notifications that might not be desired.
```

> In these cases, we recommend configuring the monitor notification to trigger only for alerts by wrapping the full message with the `{{#is_alert}}` and `{{/is_alert}}` directives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these cases, Datadog recommends configuring the monitor notification to trigger only for alerts by wrapping the full message with the `{{#is_alert}}` and `{{/is_alert}}` directives.
```

further_reading:
- link: "/monitors/notify/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Configure your monitor notifications"
- link: "/monitors/notify/downtimes/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Schedule a downtime to mute a monitor"
- link: "/monitors/manage/status/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Check your monitor status"
---

## Overview

Once [CI Visibility is enabled][1] for your organization, you can create a CI Pipeline monitor to alert you when a specified type of CI Pipeline event exceeds a user-defined threshold over a given period of time.

<div class="alert alert-info"><strong>Note</strong>: Only available in closed beta on US1, EU, US3 and US5.</div>

## Monitor creation

To create a [CI Pipeline monitor][2] in Datadog, use the main navigation: *Monitors -> New Monitor --> CI Pipelines*.

<div class="alert alert-info"><strong>Note</strong>: There is a default limit of 1000 CI Pipeline monitors per account. <a href="/help/">Contact Support</a> to lift this limit for your account.</div>

### Define the search query

1. Construct a search query using the same logic as a CI Pipeline explorer search.
2. Select the CI Pipeline events level to monitor:

>     * **Monitor over the `Pipeline` level**: If the `Pipeline` level is selected, the monitor will check the events that

Reviewer 2: I think it misses the end of the sentence

Author: fixed

    * **Monitor over the `Stage` level**: If the `Stage` level is selected, the monitor will only evaluate the search query in the stages of every pipeline.
    * **Monitor over the `Job` level**: If the `Job` level is selected, the monitor will only evaluate the search query in the jobs of every pipeline.
    * **Monitor over the `Command` level**: If the `Command` level is selected, the monitor will only evaluate the search query in the custom commands executed in every pipeline.
    * **Monitor over all the levels**: If the `All` level is selected, the monitor will evaluate the search query in all the described levels before.
2. Choose to monitor over a CI Pipeline event count, facet, or measure:
    * **Monitor over a CI Pipeline event count**: Use the search bar (optional) and do **not** select a facet or measure. Datadog evaluates the number of CI Pipeline events over a selected time frame, then compares it to the threshold conditions.

>     * **Monitor over a facet**: If a facet is selected, the monitor alerts over the `Unique value count` of the facet.

Reviewer 2: what do you mean by "facet is selected" here?

Author: I took this copy from other monitors like RUM or Logs. I changed it by using `dimensions` and `measures`. Let me know if now it's clearer.

3. Group CI Pipeline events by multiple dimensions (optional):
    All CI Pipeline events matching the query are aggregated into groups based on the value of up to four facets.
4. Configure the alerting grouping strategy (optional):
    * If the query has a `group by`, multi alerts apply the alert to each source according to your group parameters. An alerting event is generated for each group that meets the set conditions. For example, you could group a query by `@ci.pipeline.name` to receive a separate alert for each CI Pipeline name when the number of errors is high.

{{< img src="monitors/monitor_types/ci_pipelines/define-the-search-query.png" alt="Define the search query" style="width:80%;" >}}

#### Using Formulas & Functions

You can create CI Pipeline monitors based on Formulas & Functions. This is useful if you want to trigger alerts for monitors based on the error rate for some pipeline.

> In the following example, we're creating an error rate monitor using the formula that calculates the ratio of `Failed CI Pipelines` / `Total CI Pipelines` grouped by `ci.pipeline.name`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example is of a pipeline error rate monitor using a formula that calculates the ratio of "number of failed pipeline events" (`ci.status=error`) over "number of total pipeline events" (no filter), grouped by `ci.pipeline.name` (to be alerted once per pipeline).
```

> {{< img src="monitors/monitor_types/ci_pipelines/define-the-search-query-fnf.png" alt="Define the search query" style="width:80%;" >}}

Author: fixed

> <div class="alert alert-info"><strong>Note</strong>: There is a limit of 2 in the amount of queries that can be used to build the evaluation formula per monitor.</div>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<div class="alert alert-info"><strong>Note</strong>: Only up to 2 queries can be used to build the evaluation formula per monitor.</div>
```

### Set alert conditions

* Trigger when the metric is `above`, `above or equal to`, `below`, or `below or equal to`
* the threshold during the last `5 minutes`, `15 minutes`, `1 hour`, etc. or `custom` to set a value between `1 minute` and `2 days`.
* Alert threshold `<NUMBER>`
* Warning threshold `<NUMBER>`

#### Advanced alert conditions

For detailed instructions on the advanced alert options (evaluation delay, etc.), see the [Monitor configuration][3] page.

### Notifications

For detailed instructions on the **Say what's happening** and **Notify your team** sections, see the [Notifications][4] page.

#### Use event attributes in the message

> You can use all the attributes stored in a CI Pipeline event in your notification message using the `{{cipipeline.attributes.<attribute>}}` syntax. You can use all the CI Pipeline facets to build your custom notification message.

Reviewer 2: I'd say this is not clear which event we're referring to. Is this a random event that matches? The event that made the transition happen? This is not explicit, and as a monitor could refer to several values for a single tag (such as `git.branch` if it is not specified in the monitor query).
Also, what does "all attributes" mean?

Author: Fragment removed as these instructions are already covered [here](https://docs-staging.datadoghq.com/drodriguezhdez/cipipelines-monitors_public_docs/monitors/notify/variables/?tab=is_alert#matching-attributetag-variables).

In the following example, we're configuring a notification message using the Git repository URL stored in the CI Pipeline event attributes.

```text
{{#is_alert}}
This is a sample notification message for the repository {{cipipeline.attributes.git.repository_url}}
{{/is_alert}}
```

> You can mix CI Pipeline event attributes with the variable populated through the facet used to group the alerts.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this sentence, could you clarify?

Author: Fragment removed as these instructions are already covered [here](https://docs-staging.datadoghq.com/drodriguezhdez/cipipelines-monitors_public_docs/monitors/notify/variables/?tab=is_alert#matching-attributetag-variables).

In the following example, we're configuring a notification message using the Git repository URL stored in the CI Pipeline event attributes and using the variable populated using the facet to group the alerts.

```text
{{#is_alert}}
This is a sample notification message for the repository {{cipipeline.attributes.git.repository_url}} in the {{[@ci.pipeline.name].name}}
{{/is_alert}}
```

> #### Notifications behavior for monitors based on error rate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Notifications behavior for monitors based on error rate
```

> #### Enrich the monitor message with event attributes
> 
> You can use all the attributes stored in a CI Pipeline event in your notification message using the `{{cipipeline.attributes.<attribute>}}` syntax. You can use all the CI Pipeline facets to build your custom notification message.
> 
> In the following example, we're configuring a notification message using the Git repository URL stored in the CI Pipeline event attributes.
> 
> ```text
> {{#is_alert}}
> This is a sample notification message for the repository {{cipipeline.attributes.git.repository_url}}
> {{/is_alert}}
> ```
> 
> You can mix CI Pipeline event attributes with the variable populated through the facet used to group the alerts.
> 
> In the following example, we're configuring a notification message using the Git repository URL stored in the CI Pipeline event attributes and using the variable populated using the facet to group the alerts.
> 
> ```text
> {{#is_alert}}
> This is a sample notification message for the repository {{cipipeline.attributes.git.repository_url}} in the {{[@ci.pipeline.name].name}}
> {{/is_alert}}
> ```
> 

Reviewer 3: All this is already included in the link of the previous section (https://docs.datadoghq.com/monitors/notify/variables/?tab=is_alert#matching-attributetag-variables)

No other monitor type-specific page explains this, so I'd follow the same approach.

```suggestion
```

> #### Notifications behavior for monitors based on error rate

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Notifications behavior when there is no data
```

> If you are using a CI Pipeline monitor based on an error rate formula, the current behavior when there is no data to calculate the rate in the evaluating time window is that the monitor will transition to the `RESOLVED` state.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A monitor that uses an event count or a formula for its evaluation query will resolve after the specified evaluation period with no data, triggering a notification. For example, a monitor using a formula to alert on pipeline error rate with an evaluation window of 5 minutes will automatically resolve after 5 minutes without any data.
```

> This behavior might not be expected, especially if you want to track the status of the CI Pipelines that build integration branches.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this sentence, could you clarify?

Author: This was refactored. Let me know WDYT

> This behavior might not be expected, especially if you want to track the status of the CI Pipelines that build integration branches.

Reviewer 3: I don't understand it either. What about:

```suggestion
As CI pipeline data is usually sparse and can have relatively long periods with no data, this might result in monitor recovery notifications that might not be desired.
```

In these cases, we recommend configuring the monitor notification to trigger only for alerts by wrapping the full message with the `{{#is_alert}}` and `{{/is_alert}}` directives.

```text
{{#is_alert}}

> The monitor notification will only be shown for monitor alerts!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This notification will only be sent for monitor alerts!
```
